# Earthquake-prediction-model-using machine-learning

A project done for the course BUSENESS ANALYSIS - under <b>MALEFETSANE MATSELA</b>
<h3>Team members</h3>
<ul>
<li><b>PM MAHLOBOGOANE</a></li>
<li><b>N MABODI</a></li>
<li><b>RP CHAUKE</a></li>
<li><b>J SAMBO</a></li>
<li><b>C SAMBO</a></li>
<li><b>TP PHEKO</a></li>
<li><b>M MANKGE</a></li>
<li><b>MB MBAMBO</a></li>
<li><b>MC MARIRI</a></li>
<li><b>MK MOSELE</a></li>  
</ul>
<h2>Abstract</h2>
Earthquakes are higly destructive natural disasters, leading to significant loss of life and extensive damage to property on a global scale each year. Accurate prediction of earthquakes is essential for developing early warning systems, disaster planning, risk assessment, and scientific research.
This project aims to predict the magnitude and probability of Earthquake occurring in a particular region (in our case, Welkom) from the historic data of that region using various Machine learning models.

<h2>Dataset</h2>

Each row in the dataset represents a single earthquake event and includes the following information:

<ul>
<li>Date</li>
<li>Time</li>  
<li>Latitude</li>
<li>Longitude</li>
<li>Depth</li>
<li>Magnitude</li>
<li>SRC = source</li>
<li>nst - number of stations</li>
<li>close - distance of closest station to epicenter</li>
<li>rms - root-mean-squared </li>
<li>gap - azimuthal gap</li>
</ul>

The Richter scale is a logarithmic scale that measures the magnitude of an earthquake based on the energy released by the earthquake. Each increase of one unit on the Richter scale represents a tenfold increase in the amplitude of the seismic waves generated by the earthquake.<br>

<h2>Introduction</h2>
The Earthquake Dataset can be used to build machine learning models to predict earthquakes or to better understand earthquake patterns and characteristics. Here are a few possible ways machine learning models can be used with this dataset:
<br>
<ol>
<li>Earthquake Early Warning Systems: Machine learning can be used to develop earthquake early warning systems. These systems use real-time seismic data to predict the location, magnitude, and potential impact of an earthquake shortly after it has started. They can provide a few seconds to a few minutes of warning to individuals and organizations in affected areas. Such systems are already in place in some earthquake-prone regions.</li>

<li>Pattern Recognition: Machine learning can be used to identify patterns or precursors in seismic data that may be associated with impending earthquakes. This can involve analyzing long-term historical data to identify trends or using sensors to monitor changes in seismic activity over time.</li>

<li>Earthquake Damage Assessment: After an earthquake has occurred, machine learning can be used to assess the extent of damage by analyzing satellite imagery, sensor data, and other sources. This information can be valuable for emergency response and recovery efforts.</li>


<h2>Implementation</h2>
We will use four models in this project:
<ol>
<li>Random Forest Regression</li>  
<li>Support Vector Machine(SVM)</li>
<li>Gradient Boosting</li>  
<li>Nueral Network(Deep Learning)</li>
</ol>

<h3>Random Forest Regression</h3>
Random Forest is an ensemble learning method based on decision trees. It builds multiple decision trees during training and combines their predictions to make more accurate predictions. Random Forest is effective for both classification and regression tasks.</p>

<p>How it was used in our model:</p>

<p>We imported the RandomForestRegressor from Scikit-Learn, created an instance of it, and trained it on our training data using rf_regressor.fit(X_train, y_train). We then used it to make predictions (y_pred_rf) and calculated performance metrics like Mean Squared Error (MSE) and R-squared (R^2)</p>

<p>The results we obtained from the random forest model were as follows:</p>
<ul>
  <li>Mean squared error (MSE): 0.174124154</li>
  <li>R-squared (R2) score: 0.043245815</li>
</ul>

<h3>Support Vector Machine</h3>
<p> Support Vector Machines are used for regression tasks as well. In SVM regression, the goal is to find a hyperplane that best fits the data, with a margin that maximizes the accuracy of predictions.</p>
<p>
For regression tasks, SVM uses a similar approach but instead of a hyperplane, it finds a line (or curve in higher dimensions) that best fits the data while maximizing the margin. This line is the "support vector regression line."
</p>
<p>How it was used in our model:</p>
<p>We imported the SVR class from Scikit-Learn and created an instance of it with the radial basis function (RBF) kernel. We trained it on our training data using svm_regressor.fit(X_train, y_train) and used it to make predictions (y_pred_svm). We also calculated MSE and R-squared to evaluate its performance.</p>

<p>The results we obtained from the linear regression model were as follows:</p>
<ul>
  <li>Mean squared error (MSE):  0.18602178</li>
  <li>R-squared (R2) score: -0.022127</li>
</ul>
</p>

<h3>Gradient Boosting</h3>
<p>Gradient Boosting is another ensemble method that builds an additive model in a forward stage-wise manner. It optimizes the model by minimizing the loss function and adding weak learners sequentially.</p>
<p>How it was used in our model:</p>
<p>We imported the GradientBoostingRegressor from Scikit-Learn, created an instance of it, and trained it on our training data (gb_regressor.fit(X_train, y_train)). We used it to make predictions (y_pred_gb) and evaluated its performance with MSE and R-squared.</p>
<p>The results we obtained from the linear regression model were as follows:</p>
<ul>
  <li>Mean squared error (MSE): 0.1675306</li>
  <li>R-squared (R2) score: 0.0794749</li>
</ul>

<h3>Nueral Network</h3>
<p>Neural Networks, specifically a feedforward neural network, are a type of deep learning model composed of layers of interconnected nodes (neurons). Deep learning models are known for their ability to capture complex patterns in data.</p>
<p>How it was used in our model:</p>
<p>We used TensorFlow and Keras to build a feedforward neural network. Our network had an input layer with 64 neurons, a hidden layer with 32 neurons, and an output layer for regression. We compiled the model using the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss and Adam optimizer. After training (model.fit()), we used it to make predictions (y_pred_nn) and calculated MSE and R-squared to assess its performance.</p>
<p>The results we obtained from the linear regression model were as follows:</p>
<ul>
  <li>Mean squared error (MSE): 0.53166</li>
  <li>R-squared (R2) score: -1.92129</li>
</ul>

<p>We also applied some common practices like feature scaling, feature engineering, cross-validation, and visualizations to preprocess our data and evaluate our models effectively.</p>

<p>Overall, we employed a mix of ensemble methods (Random Forest and Gradient Boosting), a traditional machine learning algorithm (SVM), and deep learning (Neural Network) to tackle the earthquake magnitude prediction problem, which provides a comprehensive approach to regression tasks with varying levels of complexity and model flexibility.</p>
  
<h3>Conclusion</h3>

<p>R-squared is a statistical measure that represents the proportion of the variance in the dependent variable (target) that is explained by the independent variables (features) in a regression model. It ranges from 0 to 1. MSE is a common metric used to evaluate the performance of regression models. It measures the average squared difference between the actual (observed) values and the predicted values produced by the model.</p>

<p>A lower MSE indicates that the model's predictions are closer to the actual values, which is desirable. It quantifies the "average" error of the model. R-squared = 1: The model explains 100% of the variance in the target variable, meaning it perfectly fits the data. R-squared = 0: The model doesn't explain any variance, indicating that it doesn't fit the data.
0 less R-squared < 1: The model explains a portion of the variance, and a higher value indicates a better fit.For MSE, a lower value is better, as it represents smaller prediction errors.For R-squared, a higher value is better, as it indicates a greater proportion of variance explained by the model.</p>

<p>These metrics provide a quantitative measure of how well your models are performing in terms of prediction accuracy and the ability to capture variance in the earthquake magnitude data.</p>
